- I'm Laurence Hoff, I write Connected Places.
It's a newsletter about the atmosphere, at Proto, BlueS
ky, Fediverse, and the ecosystems, the open social ecosystems.
I'm very interested in like figuring out like what are these
systems actually?
Like there's a lot of cool narratives about what these systems
can create, but I want to understand what are they?
And recently Paul Fugy wrote an interesting article, Practical
Decentralization, where he made two specific points.
The point of decentralization, he wrote, is to guarantee the rights
of individuals and communities on the internet.
And secondly, he wrote, we use protocols to structure who can do
what.
Protocol designs are often about the how, but the consequence of the
how is an authority model.
And I think that's super powerful because that really sells what
's actually at stake here.
Like building protocols is cool, but what we're actually building is
authority models of like how social interaction happens on the internet.
Like it's easy, like many people have been getting interested in
open protocols as a sort of response to big tech bad, and
well, obviously big tech bad.
But the reason big tech bad is because of the governance of
the big tech platforms.
So that means very much like if we want to build different
platforms, new ecosystems, systems, this is very much about what sort of
governance and authority models do these new ecosystems actually allow.
And for that, I'm always very drawn to the statement by
the cybernetician, Stafford Beer, with this great one
liner.
The purpose of a system is what it does.
And I think that's both simple and powerful because it lets
you cut through like all these normative statements and intentional language
about what you want to be happening.
But instead, you can look at what is the system, what should
be happening.
Like what, not what should be happening, sorry, but what does it
actually produce?
And for that, it's also worthwhile to look at a little
bit of the history of the internet.
Like internet runs on email, the internet runs on open protocols, and
the most famous one for emails is the SMTP protocol.
And that protocol just said very little about purpose or governance or
anything at all.
It just says the goal of this protocol is to transfer mail
reliably and efficiently.
And it turns out we've been getting extremely good at transferring
email reliably and efficiently.
And it also turns out that spam loves to be transferred reliably
and efficiently.
So once you build an open protocol and like you have this
statement of like, hey, we want to do this thing.
And then otherwise, like you have a technical statement, but you don
't say anything about the governance or the power that you create
with this new system.
You can have a decentralized open protocol all you want, but these
gaps for power, they get filled by economic models.
And that's exactly what we have seen with email.
Like spam filtering turns out to be a huge problem.
Google got very good at that.
And now email is basically duopoly with Google and Microsoft.
So open protocols, still duopoly, still centralized power because the protocol
itself did not account for how it generates power.
In general, that means power and value accumulates in the layer
of a protocol that doesn't govern.
We've seen the same with HTTP.
Like HTTP also, the spec of the protocol has like, says nothing
about power.
Like Tim Berners-Lee made lots of blog posts around it
about like great ideas of what you want the power to be.
But because that wasn't defined in the spec anywhere, then that
allowed that value and the power to be accumulated in the layers
around it.
And that's how we got in this system of like, well,
big tech bad, because these companies could accumulate this power in the
layers around HTTPS.
And we've seen like, we've been doing open protocols for
a long time, like since the early '80s.
And now we've seen that in the last decade or so,
we've seen new protocols arise.
We've seen ActivityPub, we've seen Nost
ra, we've seen Matrix and now at Proto as well.
And these protocols start to incorporate normative language in the protocol
documentation.
They say stuff about governance.
They say stuff about what should this be doing, what should this
system create?
And I got three quotes from the Proto documentation here.
And I do think it's very interesting to see the norm
ative statements pop up here.
Speech and reads should be two separate layers.
Also the very normative, everybody should have, everybody has a voice.
And users are free to select their aggregators.
The protocol design sort of tradition sort of assumes a sequence.
First, you build an architecture, the design specification.
Then you grow an ecosystem, and then you add governance to that
ecosystem.
But, it turns out, like, growing that ecosystem is the same as
adding governance to this ecosystem.
Because, like, if you do not actually specifically specify, like, the governance
of the ecosystem, once you grow it, like, the implicit forms of
governance, which are often, like, if it's not specified, it's
just the most powerful economic actor who is there first, turns out
to be, become the governance layer.
And the reason for that is that because if you grow an
ecosystem or open protocol, you create shared resources.
And these shared resources are themselves governance structures because they compete, they
involve competing interest.
For example, here on Proto, like, if you build, if you
run a relay, you immediately need to make governance decisions.
You need to decide, am I going to -- which spam am I
going to filter out?
Am I going to filter the abuse out?
Am I going to filter copyright material out?
Or am I going to transfer these -- like, am I just going
to say I'm a neutral -- neutral -- layer that just transfers all
of this?
And, like, there is not a neutral way to transfer spam or
a neutral way to transfer abuse in your relay.
As soon as you operate a relay, you have made governance decisions
because these are the shared resources.
like, there's an article I wrote recently about the purpose of
protocols.
And I got two responses from Paul on that, that I think
both are worth highlighting.
First, he said, like, my belief and hope is that we've
opened the opportunities for other forms of communal resource governance to be
implemented.
And, like, I very strongly agree with that.
Like, this is why I care about these open ecosystems.
And this is why I care about, like, this conference because, like,
there's so many people around here that, like, that can -- we
can build these systems now.
We have created this infrastructure, we can create this communal resource government,
like, we have this open -- open relays, we can build the
governance structures for it.
But Paul also says, I'm almost ready to say that the
economics are determinative of the governance.
Well, I am actually ready to say that the economics are determin
ative, but if they are determinative, what do they actually determine?
For that, let's look a little bit more in detail on
what AppProto actually does.
And, basically, it creates two layers, a speech layer, a speech is
just, like, it's cheap, it's permissive, everybody can
publish, it's very easy to set up your own PDS.
And then there's the reach layer.
The reach is, like, that's where you get the feed algorithms,
that's where you get the app views, that's where you
get the indexes, that's where the people actually interact with
your app.
And the reach layer, that's actually the expensive part of operating
infrastructure, and thus, that's where the economics are actually determinative.
And that's actually what you now see in the atmosphere in
practice, like, Blue Sky, the company, is, like, three orders of magnitude
larger than any of the other operators, because the economics are determin
ative, and they operate the expensive layers of the stack.
I want to zoom in even more, I'm going to specifically
zoom in on, like, the algorithmic choice here.
We do, like, AppProto allows for algorithmic choice, allows
for everybody to run their own feed operators, et cetera.
But feed providers need users, users want engaging content, and the thing
is, what counts as engaging content is what everybody else is engaging
with.
Like, our preferences for what we want to see, what we think
is engaging is not neutral, it's not defined by the individual,
it's defined by the people around us.
Because we are, like, our preferences are shaped by other preferences, and
our preferences are intrinsically mimetic.
And for that, I want to zoom in on the for you
feed by the independent developer SpaceCowboy.
SpaceCowboy, it's an amazing feed, and it has
actually a fairly straightforward mechanism.
It looks at the post you liked, like, then it looks at
what other people also liked that post, and what other POs
they like, and they suggest then that post to you.
There's even, like, this very explicit sense of, like, how we
made it visible of, like, how our preferences mimic other people's
preferences.
That is exactly, in its most pure form, what the for you
feed does.
And actually, if you spend any time here in the ecosystem, the
AppRoto developer ecosystem, you know that people actually really like
the for you feed.
It is a very great feed, and people recommend it all the
time.
It's almost kind of a meme, especially if you compare it
to the other popular algorithmic feed, the Discover feed by Blue
Sky itself.
And that's also a bit of a meme to almost hate
on, like, the Discover feed.
Shout out to Dan for that.
Like, the reason for that is that, sorry, what's actually interesting
about the Discover feed, Blue Sky's Discover feed, is that it
's an algorithmic feed, but it's not purely engagement based.
Because Blue Sky's also trying to solve for other problems than
just pure engagement recommendation.
They also solve for a problem of, hey, there's a new
person signing up.
We don't know anything about that new person, but we don
't want to show them an empty feed.
So how are we going to show them some interesting content via
the Discover feed?
And the Discover feed is very good at that.
It has multiple purposes, and it's good at those purposes.
But what it reveals, and what you can see in how the
AdPro, the developer community engages with both feeds, is that the
reveal preference is that people strongly prefer pure engagement-driven feeds over
generically algorithmic feeds that also provide other features.
So now we start to see.
So now we start to see that there becomes a loop.
And users engage with what other people engage with.
And what a prototype does, it creates this single shared data space.
Like, this is the nature of this open protocol that everybody has,
like, and the relays, all the relays, all the app
views connect to all that single data, that data space.
Like, this means there's this singular shared data space.
So users engage with what other people engage with, and that gets
captured by that shared data space.
Like, that gets captured by the likes on the lexicons,
et cetera, et cetera.
And these feed providers then look at this entire data space, pick
out the most engaging content from that data space, because that's
what the feed providers want, because that's what the users want.
And then you see, again, get back to the top, users engage
with what other people's most engaged with.
So here we get this very interesting dynamic, what it means that
if you have algorithmic choice in a single shared data space,
that produces convergence.
And that means, like, you have, what I mean with that is
that because of this loop, we get, like, we converge on this
single centralizing point of the most engaging content.
And, like, this doesn't mean there's room for, like, niche
content and niche feeds.
You can still always create the Moz feed all you want, but
this is, by definition, niche.
And there's, like, what you get is, like, this main set
of feed that are, like, highly engagement-driven because the underlying data
space is, like, reflects this engagement-driven optimization.
And you have a very long tail of a whole lot of
niches of algorithmic choices.
You can actually already see this in Blue Sky's culture where,
like, all the data is open.
You can look at what content is the most liked on any
day, and that consistently converges on American left-liberal
politics.
And that's exactly what we would expect in this virtuous feedback
loop of, like, that this diversity of feed providers selects for
the most engaging content.
So the open system is competing on engagement, and that's how
you get convergence.
So you have an architecture that says pluralism, but the economics
of it says, no, you actually have convergence.
So we have a protocol, like the protocols, that focuses very much
on individual rights, but these rights only matter as much as your
choices to actually also are meaningful.
And that's how this openness produces convergence, because this governance is
entirely absent in the protocol layer.
And that's exactly what we've seen in earlier dynamics for
open protocols, for SMTP that also produce Gmail.
Like, the mechanism is different.
Like, that was spam filtering.
And here, it's instead of, like, engagement optimization.
Like, a protocol, the mechanism is that a protocol creates an open
space, but because the governance of this open space is undef
ined, you get pushed towards economics.
And the economics pushes towards concentration and not towards diversification.
And now, we finally get to the point where, obviously, you all
wanted to, waiting for, we can finally talk about K-pop.
Because, like, K-pop are, like, the fandoms are some of
the most largest fandoms and the most coordinated, engagement, optimized, driven,
optimization, driven communities.
And that actually works in both directions.
Like, you have the companies who produce the music, who are strongly
commercially driven and deliberately optimized for impact and for engagement.
Because, well, they're companies.
They want to make money.
And it's much more important to them than the artistic impression
itself.
Like, not shitting on K-pop here.
I love K-pop.
Like, I fucking love Jenny.
Like, we should all be more, well, like Jenny.
But, like, the companies maximize engagement.
And the same, actually, is also true for the fandoms themselves.
And I think it's actually interesting to look at one YouTube
comment section on a new K-pop song.
Like, to see what are the fans actually talking about.
And you see that they're very explicitly talking about listening to
the song on repeat to make sure that, on multiple voices often,
to make sure that the songs dominate the new charts.
Because, like, they're deliberately participating in engagement hacking because the engagement
is a validation of their fandom and of their idol.
Like, I'm guessing you understand that this isn't actually all
about K-pop.
Like, this is really what happens when you have, like, an un
governed reach layer on an open protocol.
And, like, well, when there's, well, the governance is there, but
the governance turns out to be economics.
And the economics then...
Sorry, how do you say...
And the economics means that the community doesn't match the...
There is governance on an open
protocol.
But it turns out that because the governance is not defined, the
governance is economics.
And the economics determines the outcome.
And that means that communities whose pattern doesn't match the dominant
engagement pattern get structurally disadvantaged over the communities that do participate
in, like, this engagement optimization.
Regardless of...
Irregardless of that, the protocol guarantees your rights.
And the rights to choose is, of your, to choose your own
algorithm, and it's only meaningful, is, like, if the algorithms can
actually, if there's worth choosing in between them.
But because they all point to the single data space, like, they
all converge on each other.
And there is still...
That doesn't mean, like, there's still space, space for institutional
governance.
And Black Sky actually gives a very good illustration of what that
can look like.
These are two recent posts by Rudy.
Like, he showed trending on...
What was trending on the Black Sky feeds, the Black Sky trending
topics versus what's trending on Blue Sky on the wider network.
And I think that gives a very good insight of, like, okay,
what does it actually mean to do create this sort of divergence
in topics and conversations?
Because that means setting very clear boundaries in very clear, clearly defined
communities, and those communities can have their own governance and their own
cultures that create it.
But what we see is that when you have the implicit governance
choices, like all the spaces that do not get governed by a
specific culture, that do not have this clearly defined boundaries, that's
where you get economics determine the outcome.
And when economics determine the outcome, culture that is optimized for engagement,
like K-pop, dominates.
Thank you.
Do you want to take a few questions?
Sure.
Questions.
So what do we do next?
Listen to K-pop.
Okay.
Like, it's very easy.
Thank you.
Great.
We're done now.
You've written a great
post about this.
I think a lot more about governance going forward generally, and as
you said, collecting funds for other entities in the network.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.